---
title: How the Blog Broke the Web
url: https://stackingthebricks.com/how-blogs-broke-the-web/
date: 2023/01/23
---

This article hits that nostalgic sweet spot. Back in the day, painstakingly curating each page of a website was how I liked to spend my time. I even remember making a post on the home page to announce that the site had reached 200 pages. For all the doom and gloom talk of blogs in the article, I had to resist the urge to make this a post rather than a write-up. Ultimately I stuck with the ideology and decided to keep this squirreled in some dark corner rather than present it proudly, front and centre as my "Latest Post" on the homepage.

> Homepages had a timeless quality, an index of interesting or useful or relevant things about a topic or about a person

I feel like a website should be treated more like an online garden. Somewhere with winding paths to interesting places. Somewhere to get lost in content. The blog took the content and streamlined it. The emphasis on chronological items takes away from the evergreen nature that a traditional website can have. Back in the day, "no two homepages were alike". I don't see any reason why we can't return to that. The time and effort put into a website can really result in a sense of pride, just like an actual garden. Plus taking 5 minutes to have a potter around and tinker with a few things is rewarding.

Another benefit of not explicitly running a blog is there's no pressure. Everyone has had a stale blog at some point. You start them with the best of intentions. You craft your perfect first post. Then 6 months go by and you wish you'd not done anything at all. When you curate different areas of content, it can't really go stale (except for dead links, and there certainly are a few on this website). Users can look around and see things that you are interested in. Letting them find their way, rather than just scrolling down the index of posts is a little bit more interesting.

The original post makes a few digs at chronological content. I don't necessarily see it as such a bad thing really. There is a benefit to sorting things by date. It definitely is worth at least adding a date to content. It's useful to see a snapshot of the ideas of the time. If nothing else it's just interesting to look back on your own thoughts. Similar to a journal really. The key idea is to not lump all content together and sort that chronologically. Blogs tend to group by date rather than "content or primacy or category or importance". Of those four, I think category is probably the easiest to use. Then within the category, sort by relevance (which is usually date).

They talk about how there used to be a single page listing the 23 blogs on the internet. I think the internet might be too large nowadays to not sort by date. Back then you had some context to what you were reading because there were so few sites. Also it hadn't really been around for that long so the content you were reading could never really have been that old.

The prevalence of blogging is probably down somewhat to fashion or accessibility. Everyone started to have a blog so you would pick one up too. The tech to curate your "internet garden" has always been there though. After getting fed up of manually maintaining 100s of html pages manually, I started to use Drupal to maintain my website. Sure, it lost a little bit of the magic but you could pretty much get the same effect. You were just tinkering in a form rather than a file. You could also trivially emulate the benefits of a blog. I haven't followed Drupal much but my impression is probably marketing issues vs the juggernaut of Wordpress.

Now that js is all the rage these days, we have a better solution. It takes some of the magic of manually maintaining a thriving website and adds a bit of quality of life. Of course, I am talking about [Astro](https://astro.build/). Sure it still takes some effort. You are going to need to write the whole website from scratch. But you only have to write the foundation once. And how you do it is totally up to you. You can half-ass it as much as you want! It's all about the freedom to be different. To be more interesting. Plus once you have the groundwork, Astro works so well with markdown that you don't even need to interact with html much if you don't want to.

One of the reasons I choose to use tailwindcss is the freedom. I don't necessarily choose it because it looks the best. You can make it look awful too. It's just nice to have the option rather than be boxed into some pre-existing framework. (Plus there are benefits to maintainability, such as not having to use loads of !important in css to override styles). But in tailwind, like Astro, you get all the freedom of doing everything from scratch but they nudge you in the right direction. You get some consistency so even when you half ass it, it's not too much work to get a good result. It's all about freedom without sacrifice.

The perks aren't solely to do with DX either. Content lives as files within a git repo. In my opinion that is much easier to work with and maintain than chucking a bunch of content in a database. Everything is generated statically so you get good performance benefits. There isn't really a reason to have dynamic pages and database calls when you are just writing static content. I guess you may want comments on posts but that should be achievable with [islands](https://docs.astro.build/en/concepts/islands/) (you can even get Astro to only load the js when the comments come into view, for example). The overall complexity of the whole website is just lower when working exclusively with files. You barely even need to know js. For the most simple use cases, Astro is more like a DSL (and a basic one at that). With Astro 2 content collections, they are doubling down on the DX too. Items of content are grouped into type-safe collections. No risk of errors when generating your static pages relating to those items.

Anyway, this turned into quite a bit of Astro shilling, but I stand by it. With the right tools, we can bring back the websites and homepages of yore. Everything doesn't need to be completely soulless. I'd love to have a bunch of websites that I could have a poke around every now and then. You never know though - with the frontend ecosystem returning to SSR and everything going a bit more retro, maybe we will see some more classic websites come back.
